Add makefile tour (#425)
status-im/status.im: source/build_status/makefile_tour.md

---
id: makefile_tour
title: An overview of the Makefile targets
---

# What are the Makefile targets

If you're familiar with Makefiles, feel free to skip ahead.  Otherwise, what is a Makefile?  In simple terms, think of the Status Makefile as the recipe book for all the the various tasks you might need to do within the build environment such as building the app, running tests, refreshing the entire environment, etc.  

Below are some of the more useful Makefile targets that will help you with the development process when contributing to the Status app.

## make shell

> `make shell` is the most fundamental target in the Makefile.  At it's core, it will either build or launch a Nix shell preconfigured to build Status.  If this is your first time building status, this is where you'll start.  Run `make shell TARGET_OS={os_name}` where os_name is android/ios/desktop and the Makefile will build out the Nix environment and get you ready to stat coding.  Now, go get a cup of coffee.  It'll take a while to finish this process.

Reviewer: You can find the actual correct values for `TARGET_OS` here:
https://github.com/status-im/status-react/blob/0c6cd948/nix/platform.nix#L6-L13
The `none` value is the default and allows to do some things but not build for any of the platforms.

Also, link "Nix" to https://nixos.org/nix/.

> Note: Once you've run this command once, it will just enter the already configured Nix shell and allow you to run commands within that environment like `lein cljfmt fix` (which runs the linter).

Reviewer: The word "once" used twice. Also, maybe we should add a `make lint`.

Author: Fixed the one comment.  I've contemplated the `make lint` and will look at the Makefile itself after I wrap this up

> ## make startdev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Development Targets

You will need to run one of each target in separate terminals from the following three subsections to stat development.

## Building Clojure
```

`make startdev-**` is the set of targets that starts up Figwheel and the Clojurescript REPL.  Depending on what ennvironment you're coding on, you'll use one of the following targets.

* `make startdev-android-real` - when using a real Android device for development
* `make startdev-android-avd` - when using a virtual Android device for development

> * `make startdev-android-ge nymotion` - when using the Genymotion simulator for Android development

Reviewer 2: extra space

Author: Fixed in latest commit

> * `make startdev-ioa-real` - when using a real iOS device for development

Reviewer 2: ioa - ios

* `make startdev-ios-simulator` - when using the XCode IOS simulator for developmemnt

> * `make startddev-desktop` - when developing for Status Desktop

Reviewer 2: extra d

## make react-native

`make react-native-**` is the set of targets that sets up the react-native code manager for development.  Run this in a separate terminal after you run `make-startdev-**` with your preferred device/simulator.  

OS targets
* `make react-native-android`
* `make react-native-ios`
* `make react-native-desktop`

> ## make run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building The App
```

`make run-**` will actually build the app in development mode based on your current code base and push it to your designated device/simulator.  Run this only after you've run the `make startdev-**` and `make react-native-**` commands in separate terminals

OS targets
* `make run-android`
* `make run-desktop`
* `make run-ios`

> ## make test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Testing Codebase
```

*  `make release-windows-desktop` Builds a Windows desktop version of the app (available on Linux hosts)

# Additional Targets

## Testing

There are three targets related to testing.

`make test` will run all the NodeJS unit tests once and print the output to the screen.

`make test-auto` will run all the NodeJS unit tests in interactive mode, monitoring the code base for any changes and then re-running the test suite when changes are detected.

`make coverage` will run the NodeJS unit tests once and generate a coverage report.

`make lint` will run the linter and fix any formatting issues.

## Android Targets

`make android-ports` will set up the ADB proxy ports to make sure you don't lose connectivity between the device/simulator and the development server/REPL.  Especially useful when doing development on scenarios related to network connectivity

`make android-logcat` Run this in its own terminal and it will continuously print the logs from ADB that are specific to the Status app

`make android-clean` will clean up the android development environment, causing Gradle to rebuild the entire app the next time you run `make run-android`

## Nix Targets

> Note: These targets will not work on [MacOS Catalina](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix#macos-1015-catalina).

Reviewer 2: @jakubgs i think with your latest changes these targets should work on Catalina ? we need to move this note to the top, because you still need to make steps manually to make shell working on Catalina right?

Reviewer: That's true, a MacOS user will need to see those instructions to have Nix installed.
I guess we could move it to the "Development Shell" section.

Reviewer 2: @acolytec3 could you please move? thanks!

---
id: makefile_tour
title: An overview of the Makefile targets
---

# What are the Makefile targets

> If you're familiar with Makefiles, feel free to skip ahead.  Otherwise, what is a Makefile?  In simple terms, think of the Status Makefile as the recipe book for all the the various tasks you might need to do within the build environment such as building the app, running tests, refreshing the entire environment, etc.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're familiar with Makefiles, feel free to skip ahead.  Otherwise, what is a Makefile?  In simple terms, think of the Status Makefile as the recipe book for all the various tasks you might need to do within the build environment such as building the app, running tests, refreshing the entire environment, etc.  
```

Below are some of the more useful Makefile targets that will help you with the development process when contributing to the Status app.

# Development Shell

> `make shell` is the most fundamental target in the Makefile.  At it's core, it will either build or launch a [Nix](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix) shell preconfigured to build Status.  If this is your first time building status, this is where you'll start.  Run `make shell TARGET_OS={os_name}` where `os_name` is `android`/`ios`/`linux`/`macos`/`windows` and the Makefile will build out the Nix environment and get you ready to stat coding.  Now, go get a cup of coffee.  It'll take a while to finish this process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`make shell` is the most fundamental target in the Makefile.  At its core, it will either build or launch a [Nix](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix) shell preconfigured to build Status.  If this is your first time building status, this is where you'll start.  Run `make shell TARGET_OS={os_name}` where `os_name` is `android`/`ios`/`linux`/`macos`/`windows` and the Makefile will build out the Nix environment and get you ready to start coding.  Now, go get a cup of coffee.  It'll take a while to finish this process.
```

Valid target OS options are available in the [`nix/platforms.nix`](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/blob/develop/nix/platform.nix) file.

Note 1: After you've run this command once, it will just enter the already configured Nix shell and allow you to run commands within that environment like `lein cljfmt fix` (which runs the linter).

> Note 2: Note: Theis target will not work on MacOS Catalina. Please follow [these instructions for a workaround](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix#macos-1015-catalina).

Reviewer 2: Theis - This ?

Author: Yep, sorry.  Will be corrected in next commit

# Development Targets

You will need to run one of each target in separate terminals from the following three subsections to start development.

## Building Clojure
`make startdev-**` is the set of targets that starts up Figwheel and the Clojurescript REPL.  Depending on what environment you're coding on, you'll use one of the following targets.

* `make startdev-android-real` - when using a real Android device for development
* `make startdev-android-avd` - when using a virtual Android device for development
* `make startdev-android-genymotion` - when using the Genymotion simulator for Android development
* `make startdev-ios-real` - when using a real iOS device for development

> * `make startdev-ios-simulator` - when using the XCode IOS simulator for developmemnt

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `make startdev-ios-simulator` - when using the XCode IOS simulator for development
```

* `make startdev-desktop` - when developing for Status Desktop

## Building React Native

`make react-native-**` is the set of targets that sets up the react-native code manager for development.  Run this in a separate terminal after you run `make-startdev-**` with your preferred device/simulator.  

OS targets
* `make react-native-android`
* `make react-native-ios`
* `make react-native-desktop`

## Building the App

> `make run-**` will actually build the app in development mode based on your current code base and push it to your designated device/simulator.  Run this only after you've run the `make startdev-**` and `make react-native-**` commands in separate terminals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`make run-**` will build the app in development mode based on your current code base and push it to your designated device/simulator.  Run this only after you've run the `make startdev-**` and `make react-native-**` commands in separate terminals.
```

OS targets
* `make run-android`
* `make run-desktop`
* `make run-ios`

## Build for Release

`make release` builds a release version of the app that is ready for install on Android and iOS.

OS targets
* `make release-android` Builds the Android version of the app
* `make release-ios` Builds the iOS version of the app
* `make release-desktop` Builds a desktop version of the app
*  `make release-windows-desktop` Builds a Windows desktop version of the app (available on Linux hosts)

# Additional Targets

## Testing

There are three targets related to testing.

`make test` will run all the NodeJS unit tests once and print the output to the screen.

`make test-auto` will run all the NodeJS unit tests in interactive mode, monitoring the code base for any changes and then re-running the test suite when changes are detected.

`make coverage` will run the NodeJS unit tests once and generate a coverage report.

`make lint` will run the linter and fix any formatting issues.

## Android Targets

> `make android-ports` will set up the ADB proxy ports to make sure you don't lose connectivity between the device/simulator and the development server/REPL.  Especially useful when doing development on scenarios related to network connectivity

Reviewer 3: I think it is more than just not losing connectivity, seems like you can't get a repl working on a real device without it

Author: Ah, good point.  That would explain some things I've noticed.  Will update accordingly.

Author: I added a new comment under the Building Clojure section regarding this.  Let me know what you think.

> `make android-logcat` Run this in its own terminal and it will continuously print the logs from ADB that are specific to the Status app

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`make android-logcat` Run this in a separate terminal and it will continuously print the logs from ADB that are specific to the Status app
```

its own is a tautology

---
id: makefile_tour
title: An overview of the Makefile targets
---

# What are the Makefile targets

If you're familiar with Makefiles, feel free to skip ahead.  Otherwise, what is a Makefile?  In simple terms, think of the Status Makefile as the recipe book for all the the various tasks you might need to do within the build environment such as building the app, running tests, refreshing the entire environment, etc.  

Below are some of the more useful Makefile targets that will help you with the development process when contributing to the Status app.

> ## Development Shell

Reviewer: Don't make this a subsection.

> `make shell` is the most fundamental target in the Makefile.  At it's core, it will either build or launch a [Nix](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix) shell preconfigured to build Status.  If this is your first time building status, this is where you'll start.  Run `make shell TARGET_OS={os_name}` where os_name is android/ios/desktop and the Makefile will build out the Nix environment and get you ready to stat coding.  Now, go get a cup of coffee.  It'll take a while to finish this process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`make shell` is the most fundamental target in the Makefile.  At it's core, it will either build or launch a [Nix](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/tree/develop/nix) shell preconfigured to build Status.  If this is your first time building status, this is where you'll start.  Run `make shell TARGET_OS={os_name}` where os_name is android/ios/linux/macos/windows and the Makefile will build out the Nix environment and get you ready to stat coding.  Now, go get a cup of coffee.  It'll take a while to finish this process.
```

Author: Will update in next commit.

> Target OS options are here:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Valid target OS options are:
```

Author: Will update in next commit.

> Target OS options are here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Valid target OS options are available in the [`nix/platforms.nix`](https://github.com/status-im/status-react/blob/develop/nix/platform.nix) file.
```

* `linux`
* `android`
* `windows`
* `macos`
* `darwin`
* `ios`
* `all`
* `none`

> Note: After you've run this command once, it will just enter the already configured Nix shell and allow you to run commands within that environment like `lein cljfmt fix` (which runs the linter).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Note: After you've run this command once, it will just enter the already configured Nix shell and allow you to run commands within that environment like `lein cljfmt fix` (which runs the linter).
```

> ## Development Targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Development Targets

You will need to run one of each target in separate terminals from the following three subsections to start development.

## Building Clojure
```

* `make startdev-android-real` - when using a real Android device for development
* `make startdev-android-avd` - when using a virtual Android device for development
* `make startdev-android-genymotion` - when using the Genymotion simulator for Android development
* `make startdev-ios-real` - when using a real iOS device for development
* `make startdev-ios-simulator` - when using the XCode IOS simulator for developmemnt
* `make startdev-desktop` - when developing for Status Desktop

## Building React Native

`make react-native-**` is the set of targets that sets up the react-native code manager for development.  Run this in a separate terminal after you run `make-startdev-**` with your preferred device/simulator.  

OS targets
* `make react-native-android`
* `make react-native-ios`
* `make react-native-desktop`

## Building the App

`make run-**` will actually build the app in development mode based on your current code base and push it to your designated device/simulator.  Run this only after you've run the `make startdev-**` and `make react-native-**` commands in separate terminals

OS targets
* `make run-android`
* `make run-desktop`
* `make run-ios`

> ## Testing

Reviewer: Move this to "Additional Targets".

There are three targets related to testing.

`make test` will run all the NodeJS unit tests once and print the output to the screen.

`make test-auto` will run all the NodeJS unit tests in interactive mode, monitoring the code base for any changes and then re-running the test suite when changes are detected

`make coverage` will run the NodeJS unit tests once and generate a coverage report.

> ## Build for Release

Reviewer: Move this to "Additional Targets"

`make release` builds a release version of the app that is ready for install on Android and iOS.

OS targets
* `make release-android` Builds the Android version of the app
* `make release-ios` Builds the iOS version of the app
* `make release-desktop` Builds a desktop version of the app

> * `make release-windows-desktop` Builds a Windows desktop version of the app

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `make release-windows-desktop` Builds a Windows desktop version of the app (available on Linux hosts)
```

> ## Additional Targets

Reviewer: Remove one `#`.

> ### Android Targets

Reviewer: Remove one `#`.
